CHAPTER XXVII



THE CONSTITUTION


Responsible government and federation--The task of the Convention--Types
of federal government--The Senate--The House of Representatives--Provision
against deadlocks--The High Court--The Governor-General--Federal powers--
The name 'Commonwealth'--New South Wales and the constitution--
G. H. Reid's attitude--Referendums--Conference of premiers--The Bill
before the Imperial Parliament--The Commonwealth proclaimed--First
Parliament opened.

The task of the Convention was made easier by having the draft of 1891
as a model; and a comparison between the Constitution which it prepared
and its predecessor shows both general resemblance and striking
differences. Substantially the framework of the new edifice followed the
lines laid down six years before. The departures lay in the widening of
scope and the liberalizing of powers.

The main problem was to engraft a federal system upon responsible
government after the familiar British pattern; which looks easy now that
it has been done, but which appeared to be so exceedingly difficult to
those who first attempted it that one who sat in both Conventions
considered that 'either responsible government would kill federation or
federation would kill responsible government.' The Commonwealth of
Australia has not been impaled on either horn of the dilemma, but has
successfully worked a system of federal government quite novel in
design. Very learned men were engaged in this work of constitution
building, and the student who examines the reports of the debates will
see that every example of federation known to history had been studied
by them. One distinguished man, a little hastily perhaps, or because it
sounded well, said, in urging that exclusively British forms of
government were best adapted to Australian conditions, 'As I do not wish
my boots to be made in Germany, so I do not want my constitution to be
made in Switzerland.' Quickly came the retort: 'I want my boots made
where I find they fit me best.' The whole course of human experience was
available, and the framers of the Constitution were ready to learn from
every source. But certainly they did wish to retain the mode of
constitutional government which the Australian people, understood, if it
would work under a true federal scheme.

Australia consisted of six separate States, each endowed with complete
self-government under the Crown. Not one of them need give up a shred of
its independence unless it chose to do so. But in order that there might
be a federation at all, these six independent States had to agree to
surrender certain of their powers to the new supreme government which it
was proposed to establish. When the Dominion of Canada was formed in
1867, the provincial Governments were made subordinate to the new
central Government. The provincial Governors in Canada under the
Dominion Constitution are appointed by the Dominion Government; and if
the provincial Parliaments pass laws of which the Dominion Government
disapproves, it can disallow them.

But the Australian States, in their pride of independence, were not
content to agree to a union on those lines. Instead of creating a
central supreme Government, which should take the powers it needed and
leave the remainder to the States, they desired to grant to the Federal
Government the powers which they chose to surrender, to define them in
strict terms, and to retain the remainder in their own hands. They would
be the granters of powers, not the recipients of such powers as the
central Government did not desire to exercise.

The United States form of Federation was more to the taste of the
Convention than the Canadian form. There the central Government
exercises certain defined powers and cannot go beyond them. If it does,
its action is illegal, and will he declared to be so by the Supreme
Court of the United States. A constitution somewhat after that pattern
was what Australia required, except for one very important difference.

In the United States there is not what is known as responsible
government; and Australia wanted that also. The members of the
President's Cabinet do not sit in Congress. They are responsible to him.
Congress makes the laws, and the Executive--the President and his
ministers--enforce them. But if Congress is not satisfied with the way
the ministers do their work, it cannot turn them out. It can grumble,
but cannot interfere. They are independent of parliamentary control.
Australia wanted to have a federal Parliament in which ministers would
sit, where they could be criticized face to face, where questions could
be put to them, where they could be turned out of office if their policy
or their administration did not satisfy the majority. So that, briefly
stated, Australia wanted a form of government like that of the United
States as far as regarded the strict limitation of its powers, but like
the British system in respect to the responsibility of ministers to
Parliament.

The Constitution was therefore made to provide that no minister shall
hold office for longer than three months unless he he a member of
Parliament. If a Government wishes to appoint a certain man as a
minister, he must obtain a seat in Parliament. If no constituency will
elect him, he cannot remain a minister.

In order to protect the rights of the States, the constitution set up a
house of legislature called the Senate, to consist of six members from
each State. This gave to Tasmania, with its small population, exactly
the same representation in the Senate as New South Wales, with its
comparatively large population, and might in that regard seem to be
unfair. But the idea was to enable the less populous States to safeguard
their interests if they should ever come into conflict with those of the
more thickly populated States. It was considered that if there were only
one house of legislature, elected on the principle of one member to a
given number of electors, the smaller States would be in danger of being
swamped. If, for example, an issue particularly affecting Tasmania were
in question, and on a population basis she had only five
representatives, whilst New South Wales had twenty-seven, she might, it
was feared, suffer an injustice. But that would not be likely to occur
if in the Senate all the States were on an equality. The Senate
therefore was not an 'upper house,' like the House of Lords, or a House
of nominated members, or of members elected on a restricted franchise
like a Legislative Council, but was a States House.

The second legislative chamber which the Constitution established was
called the House of Representatives, and was to consist of members
chosen directly by the people on the basis of electoral equality--each
elector in each State having the same voting power as his fellow, and no
more. There were to be at least twice as many representatives as there
were senators, and each State was to be allotted so many, according to
population. No elector was to have more than one vote.

In the section defining the right of electors there were words which
ensured that no elector who had acquired the right to vote in a State
'shall be prevented by any law of the Commonwealth from voting at
elections for either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth.' Those
words were inserted because in South Australia women were enfranchised,
and the members of the Convention from that State desired to ensure that
the right to vote should not be taken away from them under the Federal
Constitution. The insertion of the words virtually ensured the extension
of the franchise to women throughout Australia, because, it being
obviously desirable that the franchise should be uniform, the only way
of securing uniformity was to give to all women the same electoral
status as was enjoyed by those in South Australia.

Experience of disagreements between two legislative houses had been so
unpleasant in Australia, that the framers of the constitution inserted
special provisions to remove deadlocks. They also provided for setting
up a High Court, invested not only with jurisdiction to hear appeals
from state courts, but also to act as the sole interpreter of the
Constitution. If a federal law was alleged to impinge upon the powers of
the States, or if a state law interfered in a matter which was within
the federal scope, the High Court alone was to have authority to prevent
the encroachment.

Surmounting the federal edifice was placed a Governor-General, appointed
by the Crown.

Stated in summary form, the federal structure consisted of (a) a House
of Representatives, elected on a wide franchise, one elector exercising
one vote and no more; (b) a Senate in which the States had equality of
representation; (c) the Executive, consisting necessarily of members of
Parliament; (d) the High Court, the sole authorised interpreter of the
Constitution; (e) the Governor-General, representing the Sovereign.

The powers entrusted to the Federal Government were defined in
thirty-seven paragraphs of section 52 of the Constitution. Their range
was great, covering defence, posts and telegraphs, navigation, customs
and excise, trade and commerce with other countries and among the
States, currency, census and statistics, marriage and divorce, banking,
insurance, weights and measures, immigration and emigration, copyright,
fisheries, quarantine, naturalization, external affairs and treaties,
the relations of the Commonwealth with the islands of the Pacific,
conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and settlement of
industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one State. On all
these highly important subjects, and some others of lesser consequence,
the Commonwealth had power to legislate, and whenever it exercised that
power its laws were to override state laws. Thus, if the Commonwealth
passed a new marriage law, all state marriage laws would at once cease
to have validity.

The word 'Commonwealth' was first suggested as a name for the union of
the Australian States by Henry Parkes, in the constitutional committee
of the 1891 Convention--though that fact is not disclosed by the
reported debates. When the suggestion was made it was rejected; but the
name was afterwards formally proposed by Alfred Deakin, one of the
Victorian delegates, and carried in the committee by the very narrow
majority of one. When the matter came before the full Convention in the
text of the draft bill, strong exception was taken to it. To some the
word recalled the grim iconoclasts of the Cromwellian revolution--'take
away that bauble'--'paint me warts and all'--Ironsides and cropped
polls--and such upsettings as made nervous politicians blink! But the
more it was thought about the better it sounded; especially after the
scholarly eloquence of Edmund Barton had shown what a classic English
word it was. Then the Convention adopted it by twenty-six votes to
thirteen. When the 1897-8 Convention was called together, the name had
so much taken possession of the popular mind that none other would do.
Only one member took exception to it then, but he could find no support
for his objection. 'Commonwealth,' said Barton, 'is the grandest and
most stately name by which a great association of self-governing people
can be characterized'; and it remained in the title as 'an act to
constitute the Commonwealth of Australia.'

The history of the Constitution between the time when it left the hands
of its framers in March 1898 and its enactment as a statute of the
Imperial Parliament in July 1900 is full of interest. This, indeed, was
the critical period of Australian federal history. Into those
twenty-eight months were crowded many strange political adventures and a
whirl of excitement, including some acrobatic feats.

The procedure laid down in the Enabling Acts which had been passed by
the States, and under which the Convention had done its work, was that
after the Constitution had been drafted it should be submitted to the
people, and that it must, to ensure acceptance, receive a minimum number
of affirmative votes in each State. The minimum required in New South
Wales was 50,000. But after the Convention had prepared the bill, a
professed enemy of federation in the New South Wales Parliament
introduced a bill to make the minimum 120,000. It was well known that
such a number of affirmative votes could not be recorded. The clear
intention was to prevent the Constitution becoming law. Reid, the
Premier, objected to the 120,000 minimum, but himself suggested raising
it to 80,000; a figure which was sufficient to make the fate of the
measure insecure.

Reid's object was to bring about a reconsideration of the bill in
several important particulars. He disliked the financial clauses, and he
especially objected to the clause which provided that 'the seat of
government shall be determined by the Parliament.' A large body of
opinion in Sydney felt that the capital of the Commonwealth ought to be
in New South Wales. That was the oldest State of the group, and was also
the wealthiest and most populous. Reid was not only impressed by this
argument, which was very vociferously urged in Sydney, but was also so
trenchant in his criticism of other provisions that nearly the whole of
the first public speech in which he uttered them was a sustained
argument for the rejection of the Constitution by the people of New
South Wales. Much to the surprise of those who heard it, however, he
concluded by saying that, notwithstanding all the defects he had pointed
out, and though he could not take up the bill with enthusiasm, still he
could not 'become a deserter from the cause,' and regarded it as his
duty to Australia to record his vote in favour of it.

Reid's attitude bewildered many and angered more. It led the Sydney
BULLETIN to define it as a 'Yes-No' attitude--a term which figured
largely in the controversy of the period, and found its way into the
dictionary. But all leading politicians have to get accustomed to
nicknames and tags. They are rarely so injurious as those who invent
them suppose them to be. It is always dangerous for a political leader
to make distinctions which appear to be subtle, but Reid's difficulty
can be appreciated by those who survey the situation in a calmer mood
than the fierce party frenzy of the day allowed. He conceived that he
had a divided duty: to the Convention of which he had been a member and
the bill which was its work, on the one hand, and to the assertive body
of public opinion in the State of which he was the Premier, on the
other. But his adverse criticism made it impossible to secure the
requisite 80,000 affirmative votes, and though there was a majority for
federation on the terms of the bill in New South Wales--there were 71,595
votes for and 66,228 against it--the cause of union was for the time
thwarted. In Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania there were
overwhelmingly large favourable majorities. In Western Australia the
obligation to submit the bill to a referendum had not been assumed by
the Government.

It would have been legally possible for the three States which had
adopted the Constitution to federate under it by the process of
petitioning the Crown to submit it to the Imperial Parliament. But
federation without New South Wales would have been absurd, and the three
Governments felt that a patient policy was the better one. The question
was: What amendments would satisfy Reid and his Sydney supporters? Their
attitude was defined late in 1898. The Victorian Premier, George Turner,
thereupon summoned a conference of State Premiers to meet in Melbourne,
when, to the satisfaction of all Australia, it was joined by the
Queensland Premier, J. R. Dickson, whose presence was a guarantee that
the sixth State of the group was now prepared to co-operate. Five
amendments were prepared by this conference. Three were financial, a
fourth related to the power of the Federal Parliament to alter the
boundaries of States, and the fifth was the alteration which was
designed to placate the local feelings of Reid's Sydney supporters.
Instead of leaving to the Federal Parliament unrestricted power to
determine where the capital of the Commonwealth should be, it provided
that, while the Parliament should sit in Melbourne, and the seat of
government should be there pending the building of a federal capital,
the permanent home of the Commonwealth Government should be within
territory to be 'granted to or acquired by the Commonwealth,' but must
be 'in the State of New South Wales, and be distant not less than one
hundred miles from Sydney.'

These amendments made all the difference between success and failure. At
a second referendum, held in June, 1899, there were 107,420 affirmative
and 82,741 negative votes in New South Wales. A comparison between the
voting in 1898 and 1899 is instructive. It shows an increase of federal
feeling in all the States in which there were referendum polls in both
years. Queensland did not vote in 1898, and Western Australia, whose
Government was angling for special financial terms did not join the
federation till after the bill had been passed by the Imperial
Parliament. The comparison is shown by the following table:

                      AFFIRMATIVE  NEGATIVE  MAJORITY

New South Wales:
     1898 referendum     71,595     66,228     5,367
     1899     ""        107,420     82,741    24,679
Victoria:
     1898 referendum    100,520     22,099    78,421
     1899     ""        152,653      9,805   142,848
South Australia:
     1898 referendum     35,800     17,320    18,480
     1899     ""         65,900     17,953    48,937
Tasmania:
     1898 referendum     11,797      2,716     9,081
     1899     ""         13,437        791    12,646
Queensland:
     1899 referendum     38,488     30,996     7,492
Western Australia:
     1900 referendum     44,800     19,691    25,109

The attitude of Western Australia was different from that of any other
State. The gold discoveries had attracted thither thousands of men from
other parts of Australia. They were called 'T'othersiders' by the old
colonists, who, if not opponents of federation on any terms, demanded
that certain amendments should be made in the Constitution. The chief
amendments they wanted were a guarantee that the Federal Government,
when established, would construct a transcontinental railway connecting
Western Australia with the eastern States, and permission for Western
Australia to impose her own customs and excise duties for a period of
five years after a federal tariff was brought into force.

But the gold-fields population were federationists almost to a man. They
had certain grievances against the Western Australian Government, which
had refused to grant them franchise rights on an equality with the
inhabitants of the rest of the State. When they demanded that the whole
of the people of Western Australia should be given an opportunity of
expressing an opinion on the federation issue by means of a referendum,
their petition was rejected by both houses of the Parliament. The
gold-fields people then determined, 'as all other constitutional means
have been tried and failed,' to petition the Queen for the separation of
the gold-fields from the rest of Western Australia, to establish a
separate government there, and thus to enable the new State so created
to become part of the Australian Commonwealth.

In view of the strength of this separation movement, the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, Chamberlain, telegraphed to the Governor of
Western Australia urging that his ministers should 'take into
consideration the fact of the agitation by the federal party, especially
on the gold-fields,' and intimating that it appeared to him to be 'of
the utmost importance to the future of Western Australia to join at
once.' This was a clear hint to the Western Australian Government that
if they continued to stand aloof, the petition from the gold-fields
might be acted upon by the Imperial Government. Sir John Forrest and his
ministers thereupon came to the conclusion that the risk of separation
was too high a price to pay for continued opposition to the demand for
joining the Federation. They therefore took steps to enable the people
of Western Australia to express their opinion, with the result that, as
recorded above, the large majority voted in favour of the acceptance of
the Commonwealth Bill.

The Commonwealth Bill having thus been accepted by the people of
Australia, it was necessary for it to be passed by the Imperial
Parliament. But now again difficulties arose. The bill, in conferring
upon the High Court exclusive jurisdiction in cases involving the
interpretation of the Constitution, also gave power to the Federal
Parliament to make laws limiting the matters of law in which appeals
might be made to the Privy Council, the highest court of appeal in the
Empire. The English law officers objected to this limiting power being
conferred upon the Parliament. That the High Court should (unless it
chose to give special leave to appeal to the Privy Council) be the sole
interpreter of the Constitution, and of the limits of the powers of the
Commonwealth and of the States, was conceded. But objection was made to
restricting the right of citizens to appeal to the highest Imperial
tribunal on several grounds, two of which were of broad
significance--first, that the Privy Council was a bond between various
parts of the Empire which it should be the aim of Imperial policy to
strengthen rather than to weaken; and, secondly, that the Privy Council
ensured uniformity in the interpretation of the law throughout the
Empire on matters of commercial and Imperial concern.

The Imperial Government did not think that so sweeping a change should
be made unless they were satisfied that the demand for it was one 'that
has behind it the whole force of Australian opinion.' Their inquiries
had not satisfied them that such was the case.

The Secretary of State, Chamberlain, made it clear, however, that even
though he and his Government felt strongly that an amendment ought to be
made in this particular, they would not attempt to withstand a genuine
Australian demand. Delegates had been sent to England to represent the
Australian States in watching the handling of the Constitution by the
British Government and Parliament, and four of them, Barton (New South
Wales), Deakin (Victoria), Kingston (South Australia), and Fysh
(Tasmania), made a very determined fight for the bill in an unaltered
shape. Dickson (Queensland) was not so decisive. 'The delegates submit,'
they wrote, 'that the federating colonies are morally entitled to have
the whole bill laid before Parliament in the very form in which it stood
when the votes of the people, affirming it, constituted it the
Australian agreement.' They protested in a vigorous and lofty strain
against having to 'choose between the bowl of intervention and the
dagger of delay.' But the Imperial Government stood firmly by their
objection, and on the reference of the points in dispute to a conference
of Premiers which sat in Melbourne, those gentlemen represented that if
a choice had to be made between the amendment of the bill as proposed or
its postponement, they considered that the latter course 'would be much
more objectionable to Australians generally than the former.' The appeal
clause was therefore amended, and a few alterations were made in other
provisions to bring the measure into harmony with the criticisms of the
Imperial law officers.

In May 1900 the bill was brought before the House of Commons by
Chamberlain, and was considered in a debate marked by an exalted tone of
eloquent good-will. Chamberlain, a master of the art of clear
exposition, gave a remarkably interesting account of the history of the
federal movement, and a lucid analysis of the bill itself. He described
it as 'a monument of legislative competency.' 'Considering the magnitude
and the variety of the interests that we are to deal with, the intricacy
and importance of the subjects with which the bill has to deal, I
think,' he said, 'that no praise can be too high for those whose
moderation, patience, skill, mutual consideration and patriotism have
been able to produce so great a result.' Mr. Asquith, who spoke of it as
'this great fabric which has been so skilfully and laboriously built,'
declared that 'the Australian Commonwealth, the Commonwealth of the
future, is a whole which we believe is destined to be greater than the
sum of its component parts, and which, without draining them of any of
their life, will give to them, in their corporate unity, a freedom of
development, a scale of interests, a dignity of stature, which, alone
and separated, they could never command.' In July the bill passed both
Houses of the Imperial Parliament, and it became an Act on the 9th of
that month.

On September 17, 1900, by a proclamation issued by Queen Victoria from
Balmoral, the Commonwealth of Australia was declared to come into being
on and after January 1, 1901. The first Governor-General, the Earl of
Hopetoun, swore in his first Cabinet, that of the federal leader, Edmund
Barton, in Sydney on that date; and on May 9th of the same year the
rich, far-carrying voice of the son of King Edward VII, the Duke of
Cornwall and York, rang out in the great Exhibition building, Melbourne,
as he formally opened the first Federal Parliament.